hello I'm joy a poet of code on a
mission to stop an unseen force that's
rising a force that I called the coded
gaze my term for algorithmic bias
algorithmic bias like human bias results
in unfairness
however algorithms like viruses can
spread bias on a massive scale at a
rapid pace
algorithmic bias can also lead to
exclusionary experiences and
discriminatory practices let me show you
what I mean I camera I've got a face can
you see my face no glasses thing you can
see her face what about my face
well I've got a Mac my Mac so how did
this happen
why am I sitting in front of a computer
in a white mass trying to be detected by
a cheap webcam well when I'm not
fighting the coded gaze as a point of
code I'm a graduate student at the MIT
Media Lab and there I have the
opportunity to work on all sorts of
whimsical projects including the Aspire
mayor a project I did so I could project
digital mapped onto my reflection so in
the morning if I wanted to feel powerful
I could put on a lion if I wanted to be
uplifted I might have a quote so I used
generic facial recognition software to
build the system but found that it was
really hard to test it unless if I wore
a white mask
unfortunately I've run into this issue
before when I was an undergraduate at
Georgia Tech studying computer science I
used to work on social robots and one of
my tasks was to get a robot to play
peek-a-boo a simple turn taking game
we're partners cover their face and then
uncover it saying peekaboo
the problem is peekaboo doesn't really
work if I can't see you and my robot
couldn't see me but I borrowed my
roommates face to get the project done
submitted the assignment and thinking
you know what somebody else will solve
this problem
not too long after I was in Hong Kong
for an entrepreneurship competition the
organizers decided to take participants
on a tour of local startups one of the
startups had a social robot and they
decided to do a demo the demo worked on
everybody until it got to me and you can
probably guess it it couldn't detect my
face I asked the developers what was
going on and it turned out we had used
the same generic facial recognition
software halfway around the world I
learned that algorithmic bias can travel
as quickly as it takes to download some
files off of the Internet so what's
going on why is it most
is being detected well we have to look
at how we give machines sight
computer vision uses machine learning
techniques to do facial recognition so
how this works is you create a training
set with examples of faces is the face
of the face this is not a face and over
time you can teach a computer how to
recognize other faces however if the
training sets aren't really that diverse
any face that deviates too much from the
established norm will be harder to
detect which is what was happening to me
but don't worry there's some good news
training sets don't just materialize out
of nowhere we actually can create them
so there's an opportunity to create
full-spectrum training sets that reflect
a richer portrait of humanity now you've
seen it in my examples how social robots
was how I found out about exclusion with
algorithmic bias but algorithmic bias
can also lead to discriminatory
practices across the u.s. police
departments are starting to use facial
recognition software in their
crime-fighting arsenal
Georgetown Law published a report
showing that one in two adults in the US
that's 117 million people have their
faces and facial recognition networks
police departments can currently look at
these networks unregulated using
algorithms that have not been audited
for accuracy yet we know facial
recognition is not felt proof and
labeling faces consistently remains a
challenge you might have seen this on
Facebook my friends and I laugh all the
time when we see other people mislabeled
in our photos but miss identifying a
suspected criminal is no laughing matter
nor is breaching civil liberties machine
learning is being used for facial
recognition but it's also extending
beyond the realm of computer vision in
her book weapons of mass destruction
data scientist Cathy O'Neill talks about
the rising new
wmds widespread mysterious and
destructive algorithms that are
increasingly being used to make
decisions that impact more aspects of
our lives so who gets hired or fired you
get that loan do you get insurance are
you admitted into the college that you
wanted to get into the you and I pay the
same price for the same product
purchased on the same platform law
enforcement is also starting to use
machine learning for predictive policing
some judges use machine generated risk
scores to determine how long an
individual is going to spend in prison
so we really have to think about these
decisions are they fair and we've seen
that algorithmic bias doesn't
necessarily always lead to fair outcomes
so what can we do about it well we can
start thinking about how we create more
inclusive code and employ inclusive
coding practices it really starts with
people
so who codes matters are we creating
full spectrum teams with diverse
individuals who can check each other's
blind spots on the technical side how we
code matters are we factoring in
fairness as we're developing systems and
finally why we code matters we've used
tools of computational creation to
unlock immense wealth we now have the
opportunity to unlock even greater
equality if we make social change a
priority and not an afterthought and so
these are the three tenants that will
make up the encoding movement who codes
matters how we code matters and why we
code matters so to go towards encoding
we can start thinking about building
platforms that can identify bias by
collecting people's experiences like the
ones I've shared but also auditing
existing software we can also start to
create more inclusive training sets
imagine us selfies for inclusion
campaign where you and I can help
developers test and create more
inclusive training sets and we can also
start thinking more
essentially about the social impact of
the technology that we're developing to
get the encoding movement started I've
launched the algorithmic Justice League
where anyone who cares about fairness
can help fight the coded gaze on coded
Gamescom you can report bias request
audits become a tester and join the
ongoing conversation hashtag coded gaze
so I invite you to join me in creating a
world where technology works for all of
us not just some of us a world where we
value inclusion and center social change
thank you but I have I have one question
will you join me in the fight
[Applause]